=================================
Creating an Xmipp Release
=================================

Step 1: Define the Version Name
-------------------------------
The version name follows the format **X.YY.ZZ.B.P**:

- **X**: 3  
  This keeps the main version number consistent to sort releases and maintain `xmipp3`.

- **YY**: Year of the release.

- **ZZ**: Month of the release.

- **B**: Binaries version.  
  Each release starts by 0. If any hotfix is required in any repository (Xmipp, XmippXore, or XmippViz), it has to be increased by +1 in all three repositories.

- **P**: Plugin version.  
  Each release starts by 0. If any hotfix is required, it has to be increased by +1. No changes in other repositories are required.


Example: `3.24.12.0.0 - Poseidon` (for a June 2024 release). Additionally, name the release after a Greek god or goddess. `Check out the list <https://www.gods-and-monsters.com/list-of-greek-gods-goddesses.html>`__

.. note::
    The Scipion plugin manager takes the pypi package from `here <https://pypi.org/project/scipion-em-xmipp/#history>`__. This package is created in a `Github action <https://github.com/I2PC/scipion-em-xmipp/actions/workflows/release.yml>`__ that takes the __version__ from the setup.py file (in future from the .toml file.)
    The producction installation procedure takes the version._pluginTagVersion variable and checkout to that tag generated in an action of GitHub. After that clone the rest of repositorioes and checkout to the version._binTagVersion generated in a GitHub Action.


Step 2: Update the `CHANGELOG.md`
----------------------------------
1. Go through the changes in CHANGELOG.md file:
   - **xmipp** (includes `xmippcore`).
   - **scipion-em-xmipp**.
   - **xmippViz**.
2. Follow the tittle format used in previous releases.
   - This is crucial because the release automation uses these tags.
3. Use pull requests as a reference to identify changes and describe them clearly.

Step 3: Schedule the Release
----------------------------
- Announce at least **two weeks in advance** that no new changes will be merged into `devel`. This stabilization period helps identify potential bugs in the `devel` branch.
- Prepare all steps in advance.
- Post the release at the **start of your workday** to address any issues promptly.

Step 4: Check Tests
--------------------
- Verify that **most tests pass**, or at least confirm that failing tests are consistent with previous results.
- Use tools like **Buildbot** and **Hertz-Cinco** for validation.

Step 5: Update Protocol Status
-------------------------------
- Review the `_devStatus` of each protocol:
  - Set to **PROD**, **NEW**, or **UPDATED** if applicable.
- Consider deprecating protocols no longer in use or supported.


Step 6: Create Candidate Branches
----------------------------------
- Name the release branches according to the release version (e.g., `release-3.24.06`).

Step 7: Update Version Information
-----------------------------------
1. **In Xmipp**:
   - Update the name, version, and release date in `here <https://github.com/I2PC/xmipp/blob/e72e2e9ea0ae824f60ded8b1f00b404d2c99d4d9/installer/constants/versions.py#L31>`__

2. **In scipion-em-xmipp**:
   - Change the `devel` variable to `release` in `here <https://github.com/I2PC/scipion-em-xmipp/blob/9881da0c6cdec69517e26fc025500d4940d44d0e/xmipp3/version.py#L28>`__
   - Update `_current_xmipp_tag` (pay attemption the name convention, the tag is generated by the release action and looks lie this: 'v3.24.12-Poseidon) and `_currentBinVersion` accordingly.

Step 8: Validate Release Branches Locally
------------------------------------------
a. Simulate localy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
  - Check out the release branches locally or on a test machine.
  - Verify:
    - Installation with Scipion. Downolad the scipion-em-xmipp repo in the release branch.

    .. code-block:: bash

      git clone git@github.com:I2PC/scipion-em-xmipp.git --branch release-3...
      cd scipion-em-xmipp

    In your local, edit `this line <https://github.com/I2PC/scipion-em-xmipp/blob/f430dbf33871af0a503f90a864fd532fbe622271/xmipp3/__init__.py#L184>`__ to detault=True. After that, install xmipp and inspect any posible issue
    
    .. code-block:: bash

      scipion3 installp -p . --devel
      scipion3 inspect xmipp3

    - Open the scipion gui and execute a few tests.


b. Simulate using the plugin manager:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  1. **Install scipion** with the last( the one before the current release) xmipp
  2. **Create a `plugins.json` file**:  
    Use a structure similar to the one at `<https://scipion.i2pc.es/getplugins/>`__, but replace the `scipion-em-xmipp` entry with the following:  

    .. code-block:: json

        {
          "scipion-em-xmipp": {
              "pipName": "scipion-em-xmipp",
              "pluginSourceUrl": "https://github.com/i2pc/scipion-em-xmipp.git@release-3.24.12",
              "id": 2,
              "name": "Xmipp3"
          }
        }

  3. **Update `scipion.conf`**:  
    Add the following line to your `scipion.conf` file (adjust the path as needed):  

    .. code-block:: text

        SCIPION_PLUGIN_JSON = /home/userName/scipion/config/plugins.json

  4. **Notes**:  
    - The plugin manager will now fetch the repository from GitHub with the specified branch (indicated after `@`).  
    - This setup allows you to simulate an update.  
    - Ignore the version number, as it may not be properly displayed in this configuration.

Step 9: Create Pull Requests
------------------------------
- Open four pull requests:
  - **Release to master** for each relevant repository.

Step 10: Document Changes
--------------------------
- Compile a list of changed files, lines added, and other details from the PRs. Document this in the Xmipp monitoring file.

Step 11: Merge the Pull Requests
---------------------------------
- Merge the four PRs.
  - This triggers the creation of release tags on GitHub.
  - In **scipion-em-xmipp**, it will also upload the package to PyPI. Note: This is the most critical step to revert if issues arise.

Step 12: Announce the Release
------------------------------
- Share the release news via:
  - Email lists.
  - Discord.
  - Any other relevant platforms.

Step 13: Consider XmippTomo
----------------------------
- Evaluate whether **XmippTomo** needs a corresponding release.

Step 14: PR from Release to Devel
----------------------------------
- Create a pull request from `release` back to `devel`.
- Revert the tags for `release` and `devel` in:
  - Xmipp.
  - scipion-em-xmipp.

---

**That's it!** Now sit back, grab a coffee, and enjoy your shiny new release. 🚀
